


Lord Thurlow's Poems: an electronic edition.









Home


Poetry


Prose


Music


Images


Resources


About the TMA


Search






Home ->


Prose ->


Edinburgh Review ->


Articles by Thomas Moore ->


Lord Thurlow's Poems


Lord Thurlow's Poems, by Thomas Moore
[Edinburgh Review, vol. 23, September 1814, pp. 411-424] 
ART. VIII. Poems on Several Occasions. By EDWARD, LORD THURLOW. Second Edition. 8vo.
            pp. 349. London. 1813. Moonlight, a Poem, with several Copies of Verses. .By EDWARD,
            LORD THURLOW. 4to. pp. 75. London. 1814 The Doge's Daughter, a Poem ; with several
            Translations from Anacreon and Horace. By EDWARD, LORD THURLOW. 8vo. pp. 66. London.
            1814. Ariadne: A Poem, in Three Parts. By EDWARD, LORD THURLOW. 8vo. pp. 58. London.
            1814. 

 Our modern heroes, poetical as well as military, are endowed with a
            rapidity of motion and achievement which keeps gazettes and reviews continually on the
            alert. Indeed, so difficult do we critics find it to keep pace with the "'celeritas incredibilis " of some of our literary Caesars,
            that we think it would not be amiss if each of these poetical chieftains had a Reviewer
            appointed expressly, auprés de sa personne, to give the
            earliest intelligence of his movements, and do justice to his multifarious enterprizes. 
The Poems of Lord
               Thurlow—whose prowess in this way is most alarmingly proved by the list prefixed
            to this article—come graced and recommended to notice by two or three very imposing
            considerations. In the first place, the rank of the writer is not without its
            prepossessing influence ;— "a saint in crape is twice a saint
               in lawn : " —and we could name but one noble Bard, among
            either the living or the dead, whose laurels are sufficiently abundant to keep the
            coronet totally out of sight. Lord Thurlow himself seems fully aware of this advantage; and we are not quite
            sure that he did not mean a sly allusion to it, in the following motto from Shakespeare prefixed to one
            of these volumes— 
———— and then my state
 ( Like to the lark at break of day arising
 from sullen earth) sings hymns at heaven's gate.
 In the next place, his Lordship is evidently an enthusiast in his art, and loves
            the Muse with a warmth which makes us regret that the passion is not mutual. Indeed, we
            doubt whether the shrine of Apollo ever boasted a more ardent worshipper ; and if,
            unluckily, he but seldom feels the approaches of the god, it is not for want of
            invocations many and importunate. At times he even contrives, by the mere force of
            devotion, to work himself up into a sort of mock inspiration, like that of the young
                [Page 412]  priestess Phemonoe in Lucan ; 
a1
 —but, like her too, we fear he will fail in passing off his spurious ecstasies,
            upon any one at all acquainted with the true symptoms of divine afflation. 
 Another peculiarity by which this noble author deceives us into a
            momentary feeling of interest about his writings, is that air of antiquity, which his
            study of our earlier writers enables him to throw not only over his verse but his prose.
            This charm, however, is of short duration. A mimickry*  of the
            diction of those mighty elders;—a resemblance, which keeps carefully wide of their
            beauties, and is laboriously faithful to their defects alone;—the mere mouldering form
            of their phraseology, without any of that life-blood of fancy which played through it—is
            an imposture that soon wearies, and, if his Lordship does not take especial care, will,
            at last, disgust. He must not lie surprised, if some unlucky critic should fall into the
            tasteless error of Martinus
               Scriblerus's maid, and, in scouring off the rust from the pretended antique
            shield, discover but a very indifferent modern sconce underneath it. 
 The first poem, of any length, that occurs, and, perhaps, one of the best
            that Lord Thurlow has
            written, is "Hermilda in Palestine" . We are assured, indeed, by no less an authority
            than Dr Busby, that the
            "Hermilda" "has given much pleasure to the lovers of fine
               poetry." 
a2
 It would be scarcely fair, however, to animadvert upon his poem in its present
            imperfect state. We have little more than the opening of it; and the noble author has
            managed, in the course of a few hundred lines, to get half a dozen persons into scrapes
            and situations, from which twice as many thousand would not extricate them safely or
            creditably. At present, therefore, we shall refrain from touching this very tangled web.
            But, should Lord Thurlow at
            any time complete his design ;—should he ever succeed in bringing back these stray
            heroes and heroines, and restoring them to their disconsolate friends and relations, we
            promise, in our critical capacity, to pay all due attention to his labours. At the same
            time, we submit, for his soberest consideration, whether a King of Ithaca. who thus
            traces his pedigree— 
 Ye kings, and heroes, of whose race I am,
 Deducing from high Jove my sacred birth,
 And he indeed from ancient Saturn came,
 That was the first great ruler of the Earth.
(Hermilda, p. 39)
 [Page 413]  Or a King of Pergamus, addicted to the following
            pastimes; 
For in his tender years he wont to wring
 The speckled serpents, and compel to die;
 And after in the forests he would tear
 The bloody jaws of libbard and of bear.
( p. 49. ) Or finally a fair Amazon, who talks in
            this homespun style;— 
This wretched man, I sleeping in the wood,
Thought well to rob me, maugre all his fear;
But found, at last, and to his bitter cost,
He reckoned up his bill without his host.
( p. .54. ) —We submit, we say, whether such
            personages as these deserve that either he or we should be doomed to take any further
            trouble about them. 
 We come next to These are excellent. The rising Sun is, of course, the
            stock simile upon such occasions; and his Lordship thus manages his two great
            luminaries. 
As when the burning Majesty of day
The golden-hoofed steeds doth speed away
To reach the summit of the Eastern hill ;
(And sweet expectance all the world doth fill) ;
With all his gorgeous company of clouds
(Wherein sometimes his awful face he shrouds)
Of amber and of gold, he marcheth on,
And the pure angels sing before his throne ;
So you, great Sir, etc; etc;
( p. 112, 113. )

 Now, really, if Lord Thurlow were not one of the last persons to be suspected of any wilful
            deviation into wit and humour;—if we did not know how he scorns to descend from upper
            air into the low region of those will-o'th'-wisp meteors, whose brilliancy is too often
            derived from the very grossness of that earth they illuminate ;—we should swear, that by
            all these tawdry similitudes, this "amber" and "gold" , and "golden-hoofed
               steeds" ,—he meant something not over charitable to the illustrious person so
            typified. It requires, indeed, our utmost reliance upon the noble author's sublimity,
            not to suspect him of some little declension towards waggery, in the line, "With all his gorgeous company of clouds" . This, surely,
            is too happy and appropriate to be the mere casual windfall of sublimity. Aristophanes had already
            prepared us for the allusion, by representing a "company of
               Clouds" as the secret advisers of Socrates ; and, in
            short—not to enter needlessly into particulars—we know nothing in descriptive poetry
            more strikingly graphical, than this motley mixture of gorgeousness and opacity, in
            which the Poet has enveloped his "Majesty of day" and
               "his company" .  [Page 414] 
            The following is the concluding stanza of these delectable verses. 
The tears, which we have shed, no more shall flow ;
 You beauteous rising in our hearts shall glow ;
 And hymns of praise, as we behold your light,
Shall warble from the bosom of the night !
( p. 113. )

 Though we do not by any means agree with Lucretius "gigni posse ex non-sensibus sensus" ; yet we think a
            little sense might be elicited out of this last couplet, by the restitution of a single
            letter, which, we have no doubt, dropped out at the press: we would read, "Shall warble from the bosom of the Knight," —meaning
            evidently Sir George Smart,
            who has the honour of presiding over the royal concerts. 
The remainder of this volume, to the amount of near three hundred pages,
            consists of poems upon various subjects, under the general title "Sylva" . There is "The
            Induction to my poem, which I designed to write, entitled England Triumph- ant" ; and
            "The Legend of the Knight of Illyria" —another fragment of another great work—in which
            his Lordship thus introduces the dam and sire of a certain horse called Eupheme, 
Milk-white she was, as is a holy heifer,
And bore this son, as I have said, to Zephyr.
( p.2l5. ) Indeed, from the frequency and fondness
            with which this noble animal, the horse, is mentioned, we suspect that, like the famous
            philologer Henry Stephen,
               
a3
 his Lordship writes most of his poems on horse-back ; which makes it the more
            surprizing that he should ever condescend to woo the Musa
               pedestris, or dismounted Muse, in numbers so very near the ground as the
            following. 
His warlike spear into his hand he took,
And paced forth into Eupheme's stall;
Then loosed him, whereas in little nook
That horse divine was tied to the wall.
( p. 221. ) Or these: 
But pity of that lady's sad mishap
Did most torment him thro' the restless night;
 He thinks the slave will in a dungeon clap
Her tender limbs ; perhaps will kill outright 
 Or, since he now hath got her in his trap,
 Will quite despoil, to feed his appetite.
( p. 227. )

 There is nothing more delightful than to be admitted, as it were, into the
            work-shop of genius ;—to see the many unhewn masses of thought which are destined to
            grow beneath the chisel into forms of grace and magnificence;—to observe, too, how  [Page 415]  much of this precious material has been wasted in wild
            experiments and forgotten fragments;—and then turn with delight to the contemplation of
            one divine work, which, after nights of thought, and days of labour, has at length risen
            into bright, consummate beauty, and waits but the last superficial polish, to take its
            place in a niche of Immortality's temple. This is no common treat; and with something
            like this (how like we will not say) the sublime Lord Thurlow has
            good-naturedly gratified us. We have already seen how kindly he lays open his workshop
            to the curious; — how many mishapen [sic; ]  trunks, and
            pagod-looking things, (some with hardly a foot to stand upon), he has- generously
            submitted to the inspection of literary virtuosi:—But, not content with this exhibition
            of all he has done, or attempted to do, his Lordship, in some
            verses addressed "to the very noble and accomplished Lord Holland" ,
            gives the following clear account of all he hereafter means to
            do. 
Perhaps, if time and grace be spar'd,
We may prepare a flight,
Wherein the heights of glory dar'd,
And the o'er-tabled night,
From out those adamantine gates,
And plains of penal woe,
We may, returning to our mates,
In blameless triumph go.
 think, my Lord, to build a verse,
Which, if our language hold,
Shall thro’ the sides of darkness pierce,
And to all time unfold,
In language of thrice golden praise,
And ever dear delight,

What lives amid th' Olympic ways,


And in the shoreless night.

( p. 140, 141. ) The public, we are convinced, will
            be all impatience to receive the very valuable information promised in this last
            couplet: and though his Lordship seems to fear that our language may break down under
            him, we trust that no such accident will happen, but that he may perform his journey in
            safety to those "adamantine gates" he talks of, and
            tell us all about "th’ Olympic Ways" and "the shoreless night," on his return. 
In the Appendix, or continuation of the "Sylva" , there is a poem of no
            less than four hundred lines’ length, in praise of Althea, who, we at first supposed,
            must be some allegorical personage; conceiving that nothing but a "headstrong allegory from the bank of the Nile" , could run
            away with a man, through four hundred lines together, without suffering him, to draw one
            breath  [Page 416]  of common sense by the way : but we believe,
            after all, this Althea is a downright mortal mistress—though, if she knows the meaning
            of his Lordship's eulogy, she is much deeper in his secrets than we can ever expect to
            be. Menage was laughed at
            for writing to ladies in Greek; but we think Lord Thurlow's English has
            quite as little chance of being understood by them.— We defy any Greek—even Prize Greek—to be much more puzzling than the following stanzas.
               
Then are we to this fatal passion sworn,
As innocent as is the balmy air;
Nay, often on the pinions of the morn,
The angels to her golden rest repair.
What promise I myself? this perfect praise
Of spirits, and the large adoring world,
That must upon her faultless beauty gaze,
But shows the height from which I may be hurl'd.
What virtue is in me ? the way unknown,
With no diviner guide, like Hercules, etc. etc.
( Appendix, p. 10. ) A fact, however, has transpired
            in these verses, which renders them, important in a political point of view. It now
            turns out, that neither Moscow, nor Spain, nor even the inspired fatuity of our own
            government, in blundering on to success through more than twenty years of waste and
            failure, are to be assigned any longer as the causes (under Providence) of Napoleon's downfall, and
            the deliverance of Europe;—for we now find, on the authority of these verses, it was Lord Thurlow's friend
            Althea that did it all: 
Ah me ! whatever is more soft, and pure,
Than all the world of woman-kind can show;
Whatever can to blameless love allure,
And make us with heroick passion glow,
In her, as in its native seat is found,
As light has still most splendour in the sun:
The name of England is by her renown'd,

And by her charms Napoleon is
                     undone.

( p. 17. ) We have heard indeed of another illustrious claimant to the sole and exclusive glory of these happy
            events ;—but it is not for us to undertake so delicate an arbitrement:—Between that great person and Althea the matter rests at
            present. 
 We come now to the Moonlight of the Noble
            author, having already had a foretaste of his lunar inspirations in a "Sonnet" (Poems,
            p. 196) beginning thus : 
How oft, O Moon, in thy most tragick face,
The travell'd map of mournful history,
Some record of long-perish'd woe I trace,
Fetch'd from old Kings' moth-eaten memory.

 [Page 417] 
Moonlight is dedicated to Lord Eldon. "It is the labour," the Noble author says, "of two days; and presented to Lord Eldon on two accounts." We shall try the patience and ingenuity
            of our readers with but one enigmatical extract from this poem;—hoping, at the same
            time, that Lord Thurlow is
            less cruelly given than that ancient dealer in riddles, the Sphinx, who made a point of
            devouring all those that were unable to understand her conundrums. 
No soul has flown unto the gate of woe,
Or to the blissful soil, or brush'd the shore
Of Limbo with its wings ; or flown and liv'd:
But yet intelligence from these has come,
By angels, and pale ghosts, .and vexed fools,
That, straying as they wont, were blown athwart
The nether world, from the oblivious pool
Scarce ‘scaping, on our scornful marge to land ;
Thence to be blown by every idle wind,
Their tale half told, with a new flight of fools,
Eclectick, to the planetary void.
( p. 12. )

 On this extraordinary passage,—its blown-about ghosts, and eclectick
            flight of fools—and on all such extraordinary passages in Lord Thurlow, we would
            willingly pass no severer sentence than that which a Mufti, whom Toderini mentions 
a4
, pronounced upon some verses of the Turkish poet Misri ;— "Le sens de ces vers ne peut être connu et entendu de personne que
               de Dieu et de Misri." —The Noble author had evidently been reading Dante; and the same process
            appears to have taken place, which, from his Lordship’s peculiar infinities, must always
            occur upon his immersion into any such writers,—he comes out  [sic;
               incrusted]  with a rich deposit of their faults. Not all the authority of Dante
a5
 can reconcile us to hearing the dog Cerberus called "a
               worm" with "an iron throat." 
At length we arrive at a story, which the Noble author has condescended to
            finish ; —one of those chef-d'ouvres from "the working-house of thought" , which we have already said
            there is such fulness of delight in contemplating. The Doge's
               Daughter was written, as we are told in the dedication, for the laudable
            purpose of curing Lord
               Eldon of the gout,— "but I thank God," says the
            dedicator, "your Lordship's pain lasted not so long as my
               labour:" —The poem, however, is here ready against any future attack; and we
            trust the Learned Lord  [Page 418]  will find benefit from the
            application. It is a conceit of Cowley, in speaking of Ovid's writings during his banishment, that "the cold
               of the country had stricken through the very feet of his verses" :—and we
            really fear that the feet of Lord Thurlow’s verses are not wholly free from that malady, for which he thinks
            them so sovereign a cure ;—they have all its visible symptoms of hobbling and inflation,
            and indeed are in such a state as to make us feel that it would be barbarous to handle
            them too roughly.—We shall therefore be as gentle in our account of the Doge's Daughter as possible. 
The Poem opens with Aurora leaving the bed of that eternal old gentleman
            Tithonus, and Apollo 
Coming forth with all his state
From the oriental gate ;

Now the Doge was at his prayers ;

And her bright and golden hairs
Amphitrite combed free
Underneath the crystal sea
( p. 1. ) We think this
            Doge must be quite as astonished to find himself "at his
               prayers" between Apollo and Amphitrite, as his brother Doge was upon
            seeing himself at the court of Lewis the XIVth.

But yet Heliodora lay,
Turning from the golden day,
Naked, on her purple bed,
Tears, like amber, she did shed,
And her bosom heav'd with groans,
Fit to melt the marble stones
That jut upon the Adrian shore.
( p. 3. ) This gorgeous young lady, who lies upon
            purple, and weeps amber, is the Doge's daughter ;—and, not having her recollection very
            clear about her in waking, she asks her nurse 
Is not this the fatal day,
Tell me, O Caneura, pray,
When the Doge, my father, said,
 should mount the marriage bed
With the Lord Orsino's heir?
O day of madness and despair!
( p. 3, 4. ) The lover of her own choice is
            Frangipani;—she is, of course, superlatively wretched, and thus calls upon "the golden air" —of all conceivable and inconceivable
            things—to pity her ! 
O pity me, thou golden air !
For pity to my God I fly ;
O Frangipani, let me die
If I behold thee not again !
Then, overcome with sudden pain,
 [Page 419] 
The maiden fell upon her back,
All her reason gone to wrack.
( p. 5. ) The nurse endeavours to console her ;—
            Frangipani, she suggests, is gone; and it wore "idle
               pain" to sigh after him. 
Would you with Frangipani go
An exile, o'er the mountain's snow?
Would you be the windyspouse
Of a Corsair ———
( p. 6. ) But all the eloquence of the nurse is vain
            ;—the maiden is not to be consoled ;—though her talent for sleeping, in such
            circumstances, is truly enviable. 
No more the hapless virgin said ;
But fell again upon the bed,
And her bright and golden head
In the dews of night was steep'd ;

Long time then the maiden sleep'd.

( p. 8 ) The nurse's heart is at length touched,
            —whether by the profoundness of her lady's sorrow, or of her sleep, is left doubtful ;
            and she resolves to assist her in escaping to Frangipani. 
I've an old head, and that can tell—
There's nothing so impossible,
But that this eve, ere Hesper glow,
To Frangipani thou shalt go
There's never a prince in Italy
With my Heliodore shall lie,
But I'll know the reason why :
Unless, and I myself deceive,
Frangipani give them leave.
( p. 9. ) This good old woman arranges their voyage
            in the same unaffected style. 
To the Port we'll make repair :
I have a good brother there,
Captain of the ship Saint Mark,
Who will take us in the dark.
( p 11. ) The young lady puts on sailors’ clothes
            ;—is told that "it will not hurt her chastity" to learn
            to curse and swear a little ; and they embark for Athens. 
 The Second Canto opens with their arrival in "the Athenian Bay;" —they see the Duke Oeneus and his court; 
And by his side a knight there rode,
Much in semblance like a god ;
( p. 18. ) who turns out to be Frangipani, though
            shrewdly suspected at first view to be Apollo:—The Duke and his warriors depart on an
            expedition against the Pagans ; and Heliodora, after remarking that "battle is a sweet delight," resolves to follow them. She
            applies, for equipment on the occasion, to a facetious ar [Page 420]
            rmourer, who quotes Anacreon, sings ballads about Achilles, and cries "Anan ?" whenever he is spoken
            to. He accommodates her with a ready made suit of armour ; and she arrives on the field
            of battle at the very moment when an able-bodied infidel is attacking her lover
            Frangipani. 
She gave a cry, as doth a dove,
Who death will for her offspring prove;
And, soul and body, to the fight
She drove her steed against the knight:
Like Jove's divine and winged dart,
Her spear went right way thro' the heart,
And o'er his cropper he fell dead :
But Heliodore so swiftly sped,
That, falling o’er the man her steed,
She tumbled headlong on the mead.
( p. 26, 27. ) No sooner did the lady tumble, than
               
Frangipani saw the thing ;
And, making for himself a ring,
Like Ajax, with his shield and blade,
Protected the unhappy maid.
 He recognizes his Heliodora in the prostrate knight; and—in short—the story ends
            joyously with a marriage. 
The Duke of Athens join'd their hands,
Love knit them in his golden bands,
And while the stars their lustre spent,
And to and fro young Hymen went,
The Doge's daughter gave content
For Frangipani's banishment.
( p. 29. )

 If this does not charm away Lord Eldon's gout
a6
, we doubt whether even "my maid's aunt at
               Brentford" could cure him ; though she, too, used to "work by spells, by the figure, and such daubery is this is ;
               beyond our element." 

The Doge’s Daughter, is followed by . "The sense of the former poet," his Lordship tells us-,
               "has never been poetically given except by Cowley." He says
            also, "this, at least, is due to me, that I have not wandered
               far from my author ; nor made that evil, which I found entirely void of it."
            If the noble author could have extended this last-mentioned favour to the poetry as well
            as the morality of his original, we might, perhaps, have been regaled with something
            better than the stale, musty pot-pourri of poor Anacreon's roses he has
            given us. Boileau describes
            one of the guests, at his well-known dinner, Lamentant  [Page 421]
             tristement une chanson bachique ; — and heartily do we pity the audience, if
            they were doomed to more doleful Anacreontiques than the
            following : , 
 What needs it then the stone t’ anoint,
Special, if here you disappoint
Our greedy thirst, or on the earth
To pour down the goblet's worth ?
Me rather, while I live, with oil
Anoint, and with the rose’s spoil
Adorn my head, for life is short,
And call me here a maid to court.
( p 35. ) The noble translator, however, is sometimes
            more amusing; —as in the Ode, beginning — 
Yes, I wish, I wish to love ;
Cupid of old this thing did move;
But I, who had no prudent mind, etc. etc.( p. 42. ) Such flights, however, are rare; — and he has even
            been at the trouble of inventing for himself a grave, steady sort of blank verse — Anacreontique, to save him from all possible risk of
            degenerating into the usual airiness of this species of composition: — 
Then the cup let us accept,
And our wrinkled cares dismiss ;

For what benefit to you,


By solicitude disturb’d ?

Have we known whate’er shall be ?
Life to men is wholly dark.
( p. 49. ) And this is poetry ! — surely, to give the
            name of poetry to such lines as we have quoted but too abundantly throughout this
            article, — merely because they are furnished with their proper quota of syllables, — is
            a stretch of complaisance, only to be equalled by that of Linnaeus, when he classed bats
            with mankind, in consideration of their mammae. Horace has fared no better
            under his Lordship's hands than Anacreon ; — "Si flava excutitur Cloe," is
            translated "If yellow Cloe go to
               wrack." 
 There is still another publication on the list — called Ariadne— But we are so anxious, before we take leave of Lord Thurlow, to give our
            readers some specimen of his happier efforts, which may excuse, if not justify, us in
            their eyes for bestowing so many pages on such a writer, that we shall despatch this
            last production in as few words ns possible. 
 The heroine, Ariadne, is left alone on a desert island by her lover — not
            Theseus, as in our ignorance we expected, but one " Lord Marinell " — and 
 there sits,
And with her tears augments the briny flood,
Love's prodigal and widow of
                  despite.
( p- 7 )
 [Page 422]  This Despite,  whose
            widow the unfortunate lady is; must be some relation, we surmise, to "that vile thief Deformed," — who, in Dogberry’s limp, used
            to "go up and down like a gentleman " :—Amphitrite.
            however, takes pity on the deserted lady, and sends Ariel—But we really arc unable to
            get through the story ;—and must, like Sloth in the Lutrin,
            break off in the middle of our narration ; happy, if good-breeding can keep us from
            imitating that goddess, when she 
 ——— succombant sous l’effort,
Soupire, étend les bras, ferme l’oeil et s'endort.’
 We shall only remark, that it required no ordinary courage to take Ariel in hand
            after Shakespeare ; and
            that his fate here very touchingly reminds us of the story of poor Ver-vert. That
            divinely-spoken bird, in his way to the nuns who borrowed him, forgot the holy language
            for which he had been famed, and learned all sorts of vulgar abomination instead ; and
            we are sorry to say the loan of Prospero’s "bird" to Lord Thurlow, has been
            attended with quite as provoking a metamorphosis. 
But it is time to give the more favourable specimens we have promised : —
            The following reflections upon "the Sacred Islands" , are in the Noble author's very
            best manner. 
There sorrow never enters, nor sad pain
Afflicts, but joy with youthful love is wed,
And endless summer o’er the clime doth reign :
There the great poets and the heroes dwell,
And kings, who held the glorious sceptre well.
And there too you, but be the season long,
My * *, shall repose in soft delight ;
And feed your perfect soul with Virgil's song,
Your temples with pure laurel chastely delight;
Since still you sought the- right, and left the wrong,
There through the golden day, and radiant night,
Your bliss shall be ; but ah ! I fable here ;
Your virtue will be crown'd in higher sphere.’
(Hermilda, p. 55.)

 The following extract from his Lordship's "Appendix to the Sylva" ,
            contains as few of those faults which are peculiar to himself, with as many of those
            beauties which are common to him; with thousands, as any we can select. 
Much pleasure yet there is, and sweetness too,
In this pale look of the declining year;. I know not if the golden summer’s hue,
More soft to me or lovely can appear :
The nightingale, indeed, is flown away,
The zephyr on its joyous wing is gone,
 [Page 423] 
But yet the robin pours a plaintive lay,
And a soft murmur makes the air its own!
Then thus to lie amid these mournful bowers,
To dream of joys that may again return,
T’ extract the worth of these declining hours,
Shall make my fancy soar, my spirit burn :
Let others love the Summer’s flattering glare,
But I will sing to the Autumnal air ! ' Indeed, we
            rather think the most respectable efforts of the Noble author's pen are to be found
            among these lesser pieces of the "Sylva" and the "Appendix" ;—though, at the same time,
            truth obliges us to add, that in proportion as they grow rational, they cease to be
            amusing; and that we have never read poetry, which explained to us so perfectly, why
            that people of antiquity—the Traezenians, we believe—sacrificed to Sleep and the Muses
            on the same altar. 
 WE had concluded this article, when we received, by express, another Poem
            from the pen of this indefatigable Nobleman, entitled— Carmen
               Britannicum, or, the Song of Britain, written in honour of his Royal Highness the Prince
               Regent.—This is really overpowering ; and we find we have not a moment to lose in
            adopting the measure suggested at the beginning of the article, and appropriating one of
            our brethren exclusively to his Lordship. The Carmen
               Britannicum is admirable in its way;—and we only regret, that we have not room
            for abundant extracts from it. He traces the descent of the Regent in a direct line
            from Jupiter, through Hercules, Glaucus, the Tarquins, etc. down to Azo, son of Hugo,—
               
From whom our kings the Saxon sceptre claim,
And the White Horse do in their banners place.
( p. 17. ) From Azo, the pedigree flows downward
            through several other "sons of gods," till it ends most satisfactorily in the Prince Regent;—whom the
            poet thus addresses— 
 The Sun beholds thee with uprising love,
And joyous, laughs, in his thrice-golden sphere,
And does reluctant from thy presence move ;
The son of Jove, thou to his beams art dear.
( p. 23. ) He has the hardihood, however, in one
            memorable line, to charge this illustrious person with a deed, of which few have ever
            suspected him to be capable— 
Thames, by thy victories, is set on fire!
— and we were agreeably surprised to find from the following couplets, that India
            and Africa are the birth-places of some of  [Page 424]  those
            obnoxious things about Court, which we had very much feared were all of home extraction—
               
All herbs of earth are in thy gardens seen,
And in thy forests every glorious tree ;
The Indian world has been despoiled clean,
And Africa, to find new beasts for thee !
( p 24. ) One more passage, and we have done.— 
This is thy praise : but greater is thy bliss
To sit enthron'd upon the regal chair.
And see around thee what no land but this,
Can yield to thought of beautiful and fair ;
Ladies, whom nature for a pattern made,
In shape, in stature, in complexion pure.
( p. 25. ) And now we, for the second time, lake our
            leave of Lord Thurlow
            ;—heartily wishing that, as he styles himself "the Priest’of
               the Prince
               Regent," and seems to threaten many more such oblations at his shrine, he
            would, at once, assume the laurel in form, and emancipate the brows of the present
            wearer, whose Pegasus is much too noble an animal, to be doomed to act the part of a
            cream-coloured horse upon birth-days. 


Notes

a1
 [Moore's note] ——— Deum Simulans, sub pectore ficta quieto Verba referit, nullo
            confusae murmure vocis Instinctam sacro mentem testata furore. Pharsal. Pharsalia Lib.
            5. v. 148. 

a2
 [Moore's note] Preface to his Translation of Lucretius 

a3
 [Moore's note] Pleraque sua carmina equitans composuit,says his biographer. 

a4
 [Moore's note] De la Literature des Turcs 

a5
 [Moore's note] Quando ci scorse Cerbero il gran vermo Inferno Cant. 6 The iron
            throatis a tasteful supplement of his Lordship's. Ariosto calls the devil il gran verme
            infernal. To this there can be no objection whatever. 

a6
 [Moore's note] The remedy is not quite new: - From Buchanan's melancholy elegy upon
            his Gout, it appears he sometimes took a dose of the poetry of Turnebus-Aonii rarissima
            gloria caetus 


Copyright Notice


This work by Thomas Moore Hypermedia Archive is licensed under a Creative
               Commons Attribution-Non-Commercial-No Derivative Works 3.0 Unported License. 



